Character Literals (#1934) (#1964)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: proposals/p1964.md

-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1964)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
    -   [Types](#types)
    -   [Encoding](#encoding)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

This proposal specifies lexical rules for constant characters in Carbon.

## Background

We wish to provide a distinct lexical syntax for character literals versus
string literals.

In theory we could just reuse string literals for the purpose of character
literals. However, it could benefit the readablity of our code if we had a
distinct lexical syntax for character literals versus string literals.

## Proposal

The idea is to create and manage a character literal the same we would as a
string, but using the single quote delimiter (') compared to the string double
quote (").

As with string literals, each character literal would have a different type.

    var w: ch8 = 'w';

We will not support:

-   Multi-line literals
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#)
-   Empty character literals (''')

> ## Details

Reviewer: This seems a bit different from what was proposed in #1934 . Is that intentional?  In #1934 :
- the type includes the _value_ of the character so `'b'` and `'c'` are different types
- there are no prefixes like `u`, `U`, or `L`
- the difference between 8-bit characters and 16-bit characters is from the type of the variable you assign it to (and the legal literals that can be assigned to that variable), not anything in the literal syntax.

Note the approach in #1934 matches the Carbon approach to numeric literals, see #143, #144, and #2092.

Author: Oh I see, will fix

A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),
excluding:

-   New line
-   Single quote (`'`)
-   Back-slash (`\`)
-   Escape sequences

The type of a character literal will depend on the the contents, so that `'c'`
and `u'b'` would have different types (as would `'b'` and `"b"`). However any
`'\n'` and `'\u{A}'` would be of the same type (As when they are encoded, they
are the same unicode entities `%0A`).

### Types

The different character literal types should resemble the different C++
character literal types:

Ordinary (UTF-8) character literals:

> -   C++`char`: `char c = 'c';`

Author: @josh11b from your previous comment, do you think this section is unnecessary?

# Character literals

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1964)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
    -   [Types](#types)
    -   [Encoding](#encoding)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)

<!-- tocstop -->

> 

Reviewer: Please add an `## Abstract` section (see #1895 ). Maybe something like:

```suggestion

## Abstract

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-  Every different literal value has its own type.
-  The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is
   assigned to, not the literal itself.

Follows the plan from #1934 .

```

This would make a good GitHub summary as well.

## Problem

> This proposal specifies lexical rules for constant characters in Carbon.

Reviewer: This is a problem that this proposal addresses, but we are looking for something a bit different in this section: what is the problem a Carbon developer would have that motivates us to add this feature to the language?

You might motivate it with use cases like this code:

```
if (c >= 'A' and c <= 'Z') {
  c += 'a' - 'A';
}
```

This example makes it clear that we are going to treat these differently than strings: they are represented using integers rather than buffers, and have different operations as well.

Author: Does this sound good?

The advantage of having an explicit character type fundimentally comes down to characters being represented as integers whereas strings are represented as buffers. This will allow characters to have differenct operations, and be more familar to use. For example:

```
if (c >= 'A' and c <= 'Z') {
  c += 'a' - 'A';
}
```

The example above shows how we would be able to use operations similar to integers. Being able to use the comparison operations and supporting arithmetic operations provides intuitve approach to using characters. This allows us to remove unnecessary logic of type conversion and other control flow logic, that is needed to work with a single element string.

Reviewer: Perhaps you could rephrase this to focus on the use case rather than the difference between strings and characters?

## Background

We wish to provide a distinct lexical syntax for character literals versus
string literals.

In theory we could just reuse string literals for the purpose of character
literals. However, it could benefit the readablity of our code if we had a

> distinct lexical syntax for character literals versus string literals.

Reviewer: This seems more like an alternative considered.

## Proposal

The idea is to create and manage a character literal the same we would as a
string, but using the single quote delimiter (') compared to the string double
quote (").

As with string literals, each character literal would have a different type.

>     var w: Character = 'w';

Reviewer: What is this example trying to demonstrate? It doesn't seem related to the previous sentence.

We will not support:

-   Multi-line literals
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#)

> -   Empty character literals (''')

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   Empty character literals (`''`)
```

> -   Empty character literals (''')

Reviewer: `''` would be an empty character literal, not `'''`. It would be worth saying that the reason not to support empty character literals is so there is no ambiguity that `'''` is the start of a block string literal.

## Details

A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),
excluding:

-   New line

> -   Single quote (`'`)

Reviewer: It would be good to have a note later in this section with how you write a `'` character literal. (My assumption is `'\''`.)

-   Back-slash (`\`)

> -   Escape sequences

Reviewer 2: Below you give examples of `'\n'` and `'\u{A}`, so presumably we're not excluding escape sequences here. Did you mean:

```suggestion
-   Back-slash (`\`), except when used to form an escape sequence
```

> -   Escape sequences

Reviewer: I think some things should be excluded, maybe control characters < 32, but I think we do want to include escape sequences starting with a `\`. For example, as used in the next paragraph.

I'm assuming that you are going to propose using the same escape sequences as strings? It would be really good to have a link to that. If there are any differences, document those too.

> The type of a character literal will depend on the the contents, so that `'c'`

Reviewer: Discussions of types would fit better in the next section on types.

> and `'b'`. However any `'\n'` and `'\u{A}'` would be of the same type (As when

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and `'b'`. However any `'\n'` and `'\u{A}'` would be of the same type (as when
```

> and `'b'`. However any `'\n'` and `'\u{A}'` would be of the same type (As when

Reviewer: Our style guide says to avoid parentheticals `(`...`)`.

> they are encoded, they are the same unicode entities `%0A`).

Reviewer 2: Is `'\x0A'` also the same character? In particular, if we have:

```
var c1: EBCDICChar = '\x0A';
var c2: EBCDICChar = '\n';
```
... it might be reasonable for `c1` to be the EBCDIC RPC character (0xA) and for `c2` to be the EBCDIC NL character (0x15). Perhaps we should say that `\x...` sequences are special here and not the same as a Unicode character.

> they are encoded, they are the same unicode entities `%0A`).

Reviewer: The word "encoded" here is misleading. They are the same since they represent the same unicode code point. You might even say they are different encodings of the same character value.

> ### Types

Reviewer: Should go into more detail about how the type encodes the value, and how this lets us decide whether the particular literal is represented in the variable's type by only looking at the types.

Author: Could you explain this a bit more? Sorry, I'm not completely sure how this looks

Reviewer: Look at the numeric literals proposals ( #144 ) and PRs ( #2092 ) to see how types encode values there, and how this can be expressed more concretely. The specifics would be different here, representing the character literal as a sequence consisting of elements that are each either a unicode code-point or a hex-encoded byte value.

An example of "decide whether the particular literal is represented in the variable's type by only looking at the types" would be explaining how we would allow:
```
let allowed: u8 = 'a';
```
but not allow:
```
let error1: u8 = '😃';
let error2: u8 = 'AB';
```
because the type of `'a'` indicates that it can be converted to `u8`, but the types of `'😃'` and `'AB'` indicate that they cannot.

The different character literal types are based on the value of the character.

> We will not be supporting prefix declarations like `u`, `U`, or `L`. The only

Reviewer: Save the stuff we are not supporting for the alternatives considered.

difference between character types is the type of variable you assign the
character to. There is no explicit difference between 8-bit and 16-bit
characters when declaring the literal.

> 

Reviewer: What operations can be performed on character literal values? From my example before, at least `+` and `-`. Note that `+` for characters changes which character it is, in contrast to `+` for strings which (most likely) will concatenate.

### Encoding

They type of character literal and the way it is encoded should directly depends
on the type of variable you assign it to, and these different types should be

> encoded as follows:

Reviewer: Carbon source is UTF-8 encoded, so the character literals written in Carbon source code should also be UTF-8 encoded. See #142 .

-   Ordinary (UTF-8) character literals should use a single UTF-8 code unit.
-   Wide-character literals should use single Unicode code point.
-   UTF-16 character literals should use a single Unicode code point.
-   UTF-32 character literals should use a single Unicode code point.
-   Glyph character literals should use a base character (Single Unicode point)
    plus a sequence of combining characters.

This is experimental, and should be revisited if we find motivation for
expressing character literals in other encodings.

## Rationale

This proposal supports the goal of making Carbon code
[easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write)
and
[Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)
by ensuring that every kind of character literal that exists in C++ can be
represented in a Carbon character literal. This is done in a way that is natural
to adopt, understand, easy to read by having explicit character types mapped to

> the C++ character types and the correct associated encoding.

Reviewer: This rationale supports the C++ interoperability goal. Could you have something else about why this makes code easy to read, understand, and write? You could possibly talk about it being concise, familiar, and/or consistent with other things in Carbon (like numeric literals or string literals).

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer: Could you make each alternative its own subsection?

> -   No distinct character literal. In principle a character literal can be

Reviewer: Could you illustrate what this would look like, maybe using an example?

    represented by reusing string literals. However it terms of readablility, if
    we had a distinct lexical syntax for character literals versus string
    literals, this would be more inline with Carbon's language design goals
    related to self documenting code, easy to read, understand, write and C++

>     interopability.

Reviewer: How and why would it be more in line with Carbon's goals?

    -   Could have explicit character literal types that resemble the different

>         C++ character literal types:

Reviewer: We aren't looking for alternative proposals: the details about the naming of the character types and what prefixes would be used are not relevant here. We are looking for just a brief description of a category of alternative approaches, and most of the focus of this section is on the advantages and disadvantages of different approaches.

The detail on the description of the alternative should match how big a change it would be: we don't really expect the advantages and disadvantages of the prefix declaration approach to depend on details like which prefixes are used. However, an alternative that discusses changing a detail like the characters used in the literal syntax would necessarily include finer details.

(Please revisit all of the alternatives to focus on advantages and disadvantages.)

    Ordinary (UTF-8) character literals:

-   C++`char`: `char c = 'c';`
-   Carbon: `ch8`: `var c: ch8 = 'c';`

    UTF-16 character literals

-   C++ `char16_t`: `char16_t c = u'c';`
-   Carbon `ch16`: `var c: ch16 = u'c';`

    UTF-32 character literals

-   C++ `char32_t`: `char32_t c = U'c';`
-   Carbon `ch32`: `var c: ch32 = U'c';`

    Wide-character literals:

-   C++ `wchar_t`: `wchar_t c = L'c';`
-   Carbon `wch`: `var c: wch = L'c';`

> -   No explicit Wide-character literals type, as this is primarily used by

Reviewer: This doesn't seem like an alternative for the current proposal. The current proposal would support a wide-character type, and would not distinguish literals themselves as wide or not wide.

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-   Every different literal value has its own type.
-   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is
    assigned to, not the literal itself. Follows the plan from #1934.

## Problem

This proposal specifies lexical rules for constant characters in Carbon.

## Background

We wish to provide a distinct lexical syntax for character literals versus
string literals.

## Proposal

The advantage of having an explicit character type fundimentally comes down to
characters being represented as integers whereas strings are represented as
buffers. This will allow characters to have different operations, and be more
familiar to use. For example:

```
if (c >= 'A' and c <= 'Z') {
  c += 'a' - 'A';
}
```

The example above shows how we would be able to use operations similar to
integers. Being able to use the comparison operations and supporting arithmetic
operations provides intuitve approach to using characters. This allows us to
remove unnecessary logic of type conversion and other control flow logic, that

> is needed to work with a single element string.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Abstract

This proposal specifies lexical rules for constant characters in Carbon.

## Problem

Carbon currently has no lexical syntax for character literals, and only provides
string literals and numeric literals. We wish to provide a distinct lexical syntax
for character literals versus string literals.

The advantage of having an explicit character type fundamentally comes down to
characters being represented as integers whereas strings are represented as
buffers. This will allow characters to have different operations, and be more
familiar to use. For example:

\```
if (c >= 'A' and c <= 'Z') {
  c += 'a' - 'A';
}
\```

The example above shows how we would be able to use operations similar to
integers. Being able to use the comparison operations and supporting arithmetic
operations provides an intuitive approach to using characters. This allows us to
remove unnecessary logic of type conversion and other control flow logic, that
is needed to work with a single element string.

## Background

TODO: Briefly describe character literals in other languages (particularly C++, but it's often also useful to compare to Rust, Swift, Java, Python, and any other common languages that have made interesting choices in this area) and/or provide a link to an external description.

## Proposal

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-   Every different literal value has its own type.
-   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is
    assigned to, not the literal itself. Follows the plan from #1934.

```

This is just moving your words between sections, plus adding an intro section to Problem and a TODO.

    [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)

### Types

The different character literal types are based on the value of the character.
Meaning the type depends on the the contents, so that `'c'` and `'b'`. However
any `'\n'` and `'\u{A}'` would be of the same type, as they are the same unicode
entities `%0A`. It is worth noting that `'\x0A'` will be slightly different as
any character following the `\x...` sequence representation are not the same as
a Unicode character. For example:

```
var c1: EBCDICChar = '\x0A';
var c2: EBCDICChar = '\n';
```

Here we assume that `c1` will be the EBCDIC RPT character (0xA) and for `c2` to
be the EBCDIC NL character (0x15)

### Operations

From the previous examples, we should be able to use the following operators:

-   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`
-   Plus: `+`. However the behaviour of this operator is distinctly compared to
    its use with Strings. Rather then a concatenation, this will add the value
    of the two characters.
-   Subtract: `-` Similar to the plus operator, this will subtract the value of

>     the two characters.

Reviewer 2: You'll need to specify what "the value" means here. There are four cases I think you'll need to consider:

-   Both operands of `+` / `-` / comparison are a single Unicode code point, such as `'a' < '\u{1234}'`: I think the values should probably be interpreted as Unicode code point values.
-   Both operands are a single `\x`-escaped numeric value, such as `'\x34' - '\x12'`: I think the values should probably be interpreted as those numeric values.
-   One operand is a single code point and the other is a single numeric escape sequence: it's not clear to me what to do here, especially if the numeric value is greater than 0x7F. Perhaps we should disallow such comparisons?
-   Either operand contains more than one unit (whether code point or numeric escape): in this case I think we can't assign meaning to any of these operations so I think we should reject.

It might be simpler to say that these operations are only supported when both character literals contain exactly one Unicode code point (not a numeric escape sequence).

Reviewer 2: Hm, thinking about the types of operands and results:

* `+` between a character literal and an integer literal should presumably produce a character literal (if the result fits into a Unicode code point or, for a '\xAB' literal, a single byte)
* `+` between a character literal and an integer non-literal... I'm not sure about. What type should that have? Maybe we need to reject it?
* `+` between two character literals should be an error.
* `-` between two character literals should produce an integer literal.
* Character literal `-` integer literal should be a character literal.
* Character literal `-` integer non-literal also seems like we might need to reject.
* Other `+`s and `-`s would presumably convert the character literal to some other type first, eg `x - 'a'` where `x` is of type `char` would presumably convert the literal to `char` first.

Reviewer: Could you give some examples of what you mean by "integer non-literals"?

Reviewer 2: Sure, that'd be something like this:
```
fn Digit(n: i32) -> char {
  // What is the type of this expression?
  return '0' + n;
}
```

Reviewer: I would expect that to fall under the last bullet, `'0' + n` would convert `'0'` to the type of `n`.

[easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write).
Adding support for a specific character literal supports clean, readable,
concises use and is a much more familiar concept that will make it easier to
adopt Carbon coming from other languages. As well as following other standards
set in place by previous proposals. For example following the
[String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)
and representing characters as integers with the behaviour inline with
[Integer Literals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0143.md).
This also supports our goal for
[Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)
by ensuring that every kind of character literal that exists in C++ can be
represented in a Carbon character literal. This is done in a way that is natural
to adopt, understand, easy to read by having explicit character types mapped to
the C++ character types and the correct associated encoding.

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we could get away with disallowing numeric escape sequences in character literals entirely, given that one can use `0x1F` instead of `'\x1F'`. That would make some of the above rules simpler (eg, the EBCDIC example, and the restrictions on when we can perform operations between character literals), but it may make code less readable in some cases. Seems worth considering at least.

> ### No distinct Character literal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### No distinct character literal
```

> -   In principle a character literal can be represented by reusing string

Reviewer: No need for a bullet when there is only one, here and below.

    literals. For example:
    ```
    var s: String = "c"

>     ```

Reviewer: This is an example of declaring a string, but not an example showing that using a string is less appropriate than a character in some use case.

    We would simply this as a single element string. However it terms of
    readablility, if we had a distinct lexical syntax for character literals
    versus string literals, this would be more inline with Carbon's language
    design goals related to self documenting code, easy to read, understand,

>     write and C++ interopability.

Reviewer: This quoting the goals of Carbon doesn't explain why we would choose this alternative or not. Please give reasons explaining how this alternative would be advantageous or disadvantageous.

### Supporting Prefix Declarations

-   No support is proposed for prefix declarations like `u`, `U`, or `L`. In
    practice they are used to specify the character literal types in languages

>     like C and C++, supporting these could help with interopability. However the

Reviewer: I don't think "interoperability" is the right word, since this doesn't impact the ability to call functions between the two languages. I think this might be more related to "familiarity" -- looking the same between the two langauges.

>     like C and C++, supporting these could help with interopability. However the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    like C and C++, supporting these could help with interoperability. However the
```

>     proposal above supports the ideas that when a character is declared, its

Reviewer: No need to restate the "what" of the proposal here.

>     type is dependent on the value of the character itself, See [Types](#types).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    type is dependent on the value of the character itself, see [Types](#types).
```

>     Supporting this will help support a much cleaner and readable syntanx that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Supporting this will help support a much cleaner and readable syntax that
```

>     is more inline with Carbons goals, i.e [Rationale](#rationale).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    is more inline with Carbon's goals, i.e [Rationale](#rationale).
```

-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1964)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Abstract](#abstract)
-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
    -   [Types](#types)
    -   [Operations](#operations)
    -   [Encoding](#encoding)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [No distinct character literal](#no-distinct-character-literal)
    -   [Supporting Prefix Declarations](#supporting-prefix-declarations)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

This proposal specifies lexical rules for constant characters in Carbon.

## Problem

Carbon currently has no lexical syntax for character literals, and only provides
string literals and numeric literals. We wish to provide a distinct lexical
syntax for character literals versus string literals.

The advantage of having an explicit character type fundamentally comes down to
characters being represented as integers whereas strings are represented as
buffers. This will allow characters to have different operations, and be more
familiar to use. For example:

> \``` if (c >= 'A' and c <= 'Z') { c += 'a' - 'A'; } \```

Reviewer 2: Should be unescaped triple-backticks here. (Sorry, I couldn't put those in my suggested edits because github suggested edits don't support suggestions containing triple-backticks!)

        and integer literal.
    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer
        non-literal this will produce and error.

    In other use cases where the `+` and `-` operators are used, in theory we
    should convert the character literal to some other type first. For example
    if we want to call `x - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `char` we would want to
    convert the `'a'` literal to a `char`.

### Encoding

Character literals written will be UTF-8 encoded, as all of Carbon source code
is UTF-8 encoded. See
[Unicode source files](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0142.md#character-encoding)

## Rationale

This proposal supports the goal of making Carbon code
[easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write).
Adding support for a specific character literal supports clean, readable,
concises use and is a much more familiar concept that will make it easier to
adopt Carbon coming from other languages. For Example when working with literals
represented as hex, having a distinct character literal type makes this much
simpler to work:

```

> fn getSingleEAcuteHex(var combinedAcute: EBCDICChar) -> EBCDICChar {

Author: Is this a valid example to show the advantages of characters vs strings? Any suggestions on a better approach?

Reviewer 2: Maybe use something like the example from the "Problem" section? I think the use of `EBCDICChar` here isn't really helping to motivate this choice. Pointing out that we can give operators different meanings for character literals versus strings seems useful, eg `'a' + 1 == 'b'` but `"a" + 1` should be a type error.

Author: That's a good point essentially not supporting `x/...` and enforcing hex code points to be written with the `0xAB` notation. off the top of my head I don't know of a good example/advantage here. @zygoloid, what are your thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: I think this was meant to be a reply to @josh11b's comment on line 275; replying there.

### Types

Since we will be representing the character literal as a sequence consisting of
elements that are each either a unicode code-point or a hex-encoded byte value.

We can see whether the particular literal is represented in the variable's type
by only looking at the types:

```
let allowed: u8 = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of 'a' indicates that it can be converted
to `u8`.

```
let error1: u8 = '😃';
let error2: u8 = 'AB';
```

However these should produce errors, the types of '😃' and 'AB' indicate that
they cannot be converted to the declared type `u8`. However any `'\n'` and
`'\u{A}'` would be of the same type, as they are the same unicode entities
`%0A`. It is worth noting that `'\x0A'` will be slightly different as any
character following the `\x...` sequence representation are not the same as a
Unicode character. For example:

```
var c1: EBCDICChar = '\x0A';
var c2: EBCDICChar = '\n';
```

Here we assume that `c1` will be the EBCDIC RPT character (0xA) and for `c2` to
be the EBCDIC NL character (0x15)

### Operations

From the previous examples, we should be able to use the following operators:

> -   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`

Reviewer 2: What do these operations mean when one operand is a code point like 'x' and the other is a code unit like `\x63'? Maybe we should reject?

-   Plus: `+`. However the behaviour of this operator is distinctly compared to
    its use with Strings. Rather then a concatenation, this will add the value
    of the two characters:
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
        this should produce a character literal if the result fits into a
        Unicode code point or for a unicode hex code like `'\xAB'`, a single
        byte.
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer
        non-literal this will produce and error.
    -   If the `+` is used between two character literals this will produce and
        error.
-   Subtract: `-` Similar to the plus operator, this will subtract the value of
    the two characters.

    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
        this should produce a character literal.
    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals this should produce

>         and integer literal.

Reviewer 2: Same question as for comparisons: what is `'x' - '\x1f'`?

//TODO: Add Description

```
    var b: String = "b";
    var c: String = "c";
    if (c > b) {
        b = c + b;
    }
```

We would simply this as a single element string. However it terms of
readablility, if we had a distinct lexical syntax for character literals versus
string literals, this would be more inline with Carbon's language design goals
related to self documenting code, easy to read, understand, write and C++
interopability.

### Supporting Prefix Declarations

No support is proposed for prefix declarations like `u`, `U`, or `L`. In
practice they are used to specify the character literal types in languages like
C and C++, supporting these could help with the familiarity of coming to Carbon
with a more C++ or C background. Supporting this will help support a much
cleaner and readable syntax that is more inline with Carbon's goals, i.e
[Rationale](#rationale).

### Disallowing Numeric Escape Sequences

Not support escaping numeric sequences. This would simplify some of the design
choices seen above, specifically how we manage [Types](#types) and of the
`EBCDIC` type, disallowing the `\x...` pattern. This would restrict users by

> having to use the specific hex value, restrict when to use operations between

Author: @zygoloid  could you explain/what an example of restricting operations on `EBCDIC` types is?

Reviewer 2: What I meant was that it'd make the story for types simpler -- we wouldn't need to worry about whether `'\n'` and `'\x0A'` have the same type if the latter is invalid.

So, I'd say this'd simplify the design by making types simpler and making the restrictions on, and behavior of, operations on character literals simpler.

# Character literals

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1964)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Abstract](#abstract)
-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
    -   [Types](#types)
    -   [Operations](#operations)
    -   [Encoding](#encoding)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [No Distinct Character Literal](#no-distinct-character-literal)
    -   [Supporting Prefix Declarations](#supporting-prefix-declarations)
    -   [Disallowing Numeric Escape Sequences](#disallowing-numeric-escape-sequences)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

This proposal specifies lexical rules for constant characters in Carbon:

> Put character literals in single quotes, like 'a'. Character literals work like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work like
```

numeric literals:

Every different literal value has its own type. The bit width is determined by
the type of the variable the literal is assigned to, not the literal itself.

> Follows the plan from Open design idea: character literals #1934.

Reviewer: Please make this a link.

## Background

Character Literals by definition is a type of literal in programming for the
representation of a single character's value within the source code of a
computer program. Character literals between languages have some minor nuances
but are fundamentally designed for the same purpose. Languages that have a
dedicated character data type generally include character literals, for example
C++, Java, Swift to name a few. Whereas other languages that lack distinct
character type, like Python use strings of length one to serve the same purpose
a character data type. For more information see
[Character Literals Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Character_literal),
[Character Literals DBpedia](https://dbpedia.org/page/Character_literal)

## Proposal

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-   Every different literal value has its own type.
-   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is
    assigned to, not the literal itself. Follows the plan from #1934.

We will not support:

-   Multi-line literals
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#)
-   Empty character literals (`''`)

> -   ASCII Control codes (0...31), except for `\` when used for an escape

Reviewer 2: #199 disallows whitespace characters other than space, and this proposal disallows ASCII control characters. We should be consistent; I suggest we disallow both kinds of characters from appearing verbatim in both character and string literals.

Author: I see, so something like
`-   Whitespace characters other than word space: tab, line feed, carriage return, form feed, and vertical tab.` ?

    sequence. See

>     [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)

Reviewer 2: My reading of this is that we won't support U+0000..U+001F, except that we will support `\` (U+005C) when used as part of an escape sequence, which I find confusing because U+005C isn't in that range, and I don't think this is what we mean. Is this the intent:

```suggestion
-   ASCII Control codes (0...31), except when specified with an escape sequence.
    See
    [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)
```

## Details

A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),
excluding:

-   New line
-   Single quote (`'`), but can write `'` character as `'\''`
-   Back-slash (`\`), except when used to form an escape sequence. See
    [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)

### Types

Since we will be representing the character literal as a sequence consisting of

> elements that are each either a unicode code-point or a hex-encoded byte value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will represent a character literal as a sequence consisting of
elements that are each either a unicode code-point or a hex-encoded byte value.
```

We can see whether the particular literal is represented in the variable's type
by only looking at the types:

```
let allowed: u8 = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of 'a' indicates that it can be converted
to `u8`.

```
let error1: u8 = '😃';
let error2: u8 = 'AB';
```

However these should produce errors, the types of '😃' and 'AB' indicate that
they cannot be converted to the declared type `u8`. However any `'\n'` and
`'\u{A}'` would be of the same type, as they are the same unicode entities
`%0A`. It is worth noting that `'\x0A'` will be slightly different as any
character following the `\x...` sequence representation are not the same as a

> Unicode character. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
character following the `\x...` sequence representation is not the same as a
Unicode character. For example:
```

```
var c1: EBCDICChar = '\x0A';
var c2: EBCDICChar = '\n';
```

Here we assume that `c1` will be the EBCDIC RPT character (0xA) and for `c2` to
be the EBCDIC NL character (0x15)

### Operations

From the previous examples, we should be able to use the following operators:

-   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`
    -   If any of the comparison operators are used between a code point and a
        code unit, this will produce and error.
-   Plus: `+`. However the behaviour of this operator is distinctly compared to
    its use with Strings. Rather then a concatenation, this will add the value
    of the two characters:
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
        this should produce a character literal if the result fits into a
        Unicode code point or for a unicode hex code like `'\xAB'`, a single
        byte.
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer
        non-literal this will produce and error.
    -   If the `+` is used between two character literals this will produce and
        error.
    -   If the `+` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this

>         will produce and error.

Reviewer 2: I think we don't need this bullet: it's a subset of the previous bullet.

-   Subtract: `-` Similar to the plus operator, this will subtract the value of
    the two characters.

    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
        this should produce a character literal.

>     -   If the `-` is used between two character literals this should produce
>         and integer literal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals, which are either
        both a single code point or both a single code unit, this should produce
        and integer literal representing the difference between the code points
        or code units.
```

I don't think we can specify what `'ab' - 'a'` means, nor `'a' - '\x01'`.

    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer
        non-literal this will produce and error.
    -   If the `-` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this
        will produce and error.

    In other use cases where the `+` and `-` operators are used, in theory we
    should convert the character literal to some other type first. For example

>     if we want to call `x - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `char` we would want to

Reviewer: Do you mean
```suggestion
    if we want to call `x - 'a'`, where `x` is of type `char` we would want to
```
or
```suggestion
    if we want to call `w - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `char` we would want to
```
?

> -   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`
>     -   If any of the comparison operators are used between a code point and a
>         code unit, this will produce and error.
> -   Plus: `+`. However the behaviour of this operator is distinctly compared to
>     its use with Strings. Rather then a concatenation, this will add the value
>     of the two characters:
>     -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
>         this should produce a character literal if the result fits into a
>         Unicode code point or for a unicode hex code like `'\xAB'`, a single
>         byte.
>     -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer
>         non-literal this will produce and error.
>     -   If the `+` is used between two character literals this will produce and
>         error.
>     -   If the `+` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this
>         will produce and error.
> -   Subtract: `-` Similar to the plus operator, this will subtract the value of
>     the two characters.
> 
>     -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
>         this should produce a character literal.
>     -   If the `-` is used between two character literals this should produce
>         and integer literal.
>     -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer
>         non-literal this will produce and error.
>     -   If the `-` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this
>         will produce and error.
> 
>     In other use cases where the `+` and `-` operators are used, in theory we
>     should convert the character literal to some other type first. For example
>     if we want to call `x - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `char` we would want to
>     convert the `'a'` literal to a `char`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`
    -   If any of the comparison operators are used between a code point and a
        code unit, this will produce an error.
-   Plus: `+`. However the behaviour of this operator is distinct compared to
    its use with Strings. Rather than a concatenation, this will add the value
    of the two characters:
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
        this should produce a character literal if the result fits into a
        Unicode code point or for a unicode hex code like `'\xAB'`, a single
        byte.
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer
        non-literal this will produce an error.
    -   If the `+` is used between two character literals this will produce an
        error.
    -   If the `+` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this
        will produce an error.
-   Subtract: `-` Similar to the plus operator, this will subtract the value of
    the two characters.

    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
        this should produce a character literal.
    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals this should produce
        an integer literal.
    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer
        non-literal this will produce an error.
    -   If the `-` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this
        will produce an error.

    In other use cases where the `+` and `-` operators are used, in theory we
    should convert the character literal to some other type first. For example
    if we want to call `x - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `char` we would want to
    convert the `'a'` literal to a `char`.
```

Just typographical things: `and` -> `an`, `then` -> `than`.

### Encoding

Character literals written will be UTF-8 encoded, as all of Carbon source code
is UTF-8 encoded. See
[Unicode source files](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0142.md#character-encoding)

## Rationale

This proposal supports the goal of making Carbon code
[easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write).
Adding support for a specific character literal supports clean, readable,
concises use and is a much more familiar concept that will make it easier to

> adopt Carbon coming from other languages. For Example when working with literals

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
adopt Carbon coming from other languages. For example when working with literals
```

represented as hex, having a distinct character literal type makes this much
simpler to work:

```
fn getSingleEAcuteHex(var combinedAcute: EBCDICChar) -> EBCDICChar {
    var eAcute: EBCDICChar = '\u{E0}';

    while (eAcute != combinedAcute) {
        eAcute += 1;
    }
    return eAcute;
}

    var combinedEAcute: EBCDICChar = '\u{65}\u{300}';
    var a: auto = getSingleEAcuteHex(combinedEAcute);
```

This allows us to use specific operations designed to manipulate the literals
value. Whereas with a String, we would need to have additional logic to store,
check and assign the specific value:

```
fn getSingleEAcuteHex(var combinedAcute: String) -> String {
    var eAcute: String = "\u{E0}";
    var accentValue: i32 = 0;

    while (eAcute != combinedAcute) {
        accentValue += 1;
        eAcute = "\u{E{accentValue}}";
    }
    return eAcute;
}

    var combinedEAcute: String = "\u{65}\u{300}";
    var a: auto = getSingleEAcuteHex(combinedEAcute);
```

> Using a `String` also leads to further issues regarding familiarty with other

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using a `String` also leads to further issues regarding familiarity with other
```

[Integer Literals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0143.md).
This also supports our goal for
[Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)
by ensuring that every kind of character literal that exists in C++ can be
represented in a Carbon character literal. This is done in a way that is natural
to adopt, understand, easy to read by having explicit character types mapped to
the C++ character types and the correct associated encoding.

## Alternatives considered

### No Distinct Character Literal

In principle a character literal can be represented by reusing string literals.
//TODO: Add Description

```
    var b: String = "b";
    var c: String = "c";
    if (c > b) {
        b = c + b;
    }
```

We would simply this as a single element string. However it terms of
readablility, if we had a distinct lexical syntax for character literals versus
string literals, this would be more inline with Carbon's language design goals
related to self documenting code, easy to read, understand, write and C++

> interopability.

Reviewer: This is too generic a justification, here and in the later alternatives. We are looking for a rationale that specifically applies to the difference between the two alternatives.

## Proposal

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-   Every different literal value has its own type.
-   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is
    assigned to, not the literal itself. Follows the plan from #1934.

We will not support:

-   Multi-line literals
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#)
-   Empty character literals (`''`)
-   ASCII Control codes (0...31), except when specified with an escape sequence.
-   Whitespace characters other than word space: tab, line feed, carriage
    return, form feed, and vertical tab. See
    [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)

## Details

A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),
excluding:

-   New line
-   Single quote (`'`), but can write `'` character as `'\''`
-   Back-slash (`\`), except when used to form an escape sequence. See
    [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   Whitespace characters other than space (` `).
-   ASCII control codes (0...31).

```

Just reiterating what you said above, for completeness.

### Types

We will represent a character literal as a sequence consisting of elements that
are each either a unicode code-point or a hex-encoded byte value.

We can see whether the particular literal is represented in the variable's type
by only looking at the types:

```
let allowed: u8 = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of 'a' indicates that it can be converted

> to `u8`.

Reviewer 2: Is the intent here that we will permit a character literal that fits into 8 bits to convert to `u8`? I think we'd want a different, dedicated type for that, like C++'s `char8_t`. For this proposal I suggest we defer that question, and instead write here something like:

````suggestion
```
let allowed: Char8 = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of 'a' indicates that it can be converted
to `Char8`. Here, `Char8` is a type that can represent a single 8-bit character,
like C++'s `char8_t`. `Char8` is used for exposition and is not part of this
proposal.

````

```
let error1: u8 = '😃';
let error2: u8 = 'AB';
```

However these should produce errors, the types of '😃' and 'AB' indicate that

> they cannot be converted to the declared type `u8`. It is important to point out

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```
let error1: Char8 = '😃';
let error2: Char8 = 'AB';
```

However these should produce errors, the types of '😃' and 'AB' indicate that
they cannot be converted to the declared type `Char8`. It is important to point out
````
(Continuing from above comment.)

```
var c1: EBCDICChar = '\x0A';
var c2: EBCDICChar = '\n';
```

Here we assume that `c1` will be the EBCDIC RPT character (0xA) and for `c2` to
be the EBCDIC NL character (0x15)

### Operations

From the previous examples, we should be able to use the following operators:

-   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`
    -   If any of the comparison operators are used between a code point and a
        code unit, this will produce an error.
-   Plus: `+`. However the behaviour of this operator is distinct compared to
    its use with Strings. Rather than a concatenation, this will add the value
    of the two characters:
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
        this should produce a character literal if the result fits into a
        Unicode code point or for a unicode hex code like `'\xAB'`, a single
        byte.
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer
        non-literal this will produce an error.
    -   If the `+` is used between two character literals this will produce an
        error.
    -   If the `+` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this

>         will produce an error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This is already covered by the previous bullet.

-   Subtract: `-` Similar to the plus operator, this will subtract the value of
    the two characters.

    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
        this should produce a character literal.
    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals, which are either both

>         a single code point or both a single code unit, this should produce and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        a single code point or both a single code unit, this should produce an
```

        integer literal representing the difference between the code points or
        code units.
    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer
        non-literal this will produce an error.
    -   If the `-` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this

>         will produce and error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        will produce an error.
```

concise use and is a much more familiar concept that will make it easier to
adopt Carbon coming from other languages. Have a distinct character literally
will also allow us support useful operations designed to manipulate the literals
value. When working with `String`, we use the `+` operator to concatenate
multiple `String`s, but say we wanted to advance a character to the next
literal. Using a `String` will produce a type error, as we are misusing the `+`
operator: `"a" + 1`. However with a character literal, we can support operations
for these use cases:

```
var b: u8;

b = 'a' + 1;
b + 1 == 'c';

```

See [Operations](#operations) and
[No Distinct Character Literal](#no-distinct-character-literal) for more
information.

Further, this design follows other standards set in place by previous proposals.
For example following the
[String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)
and representing characters as integers with the behaviour inline with
[Integer Literals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0143.md).

> This also supports our goal for

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This also supports our goal for
```

[Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)
by ensuring that every kind of character literal that exists in C++ can be
represented in a Carbon character literal. This is done in a way that is natural
to adopt, understand, easy to read by having explicit character types mapped to
the C++ character types and the correct associated encoding.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Finally, the choice to use Unicode and UTF-8 by default reflects the Carbon goal to prioritize
[modern OS platforms, hardware architectures, and environments](/docs/project/goals.md#modern-os-platforms-hardware-architectures-and-environments).
This reflects the [growing adoption of UTF-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8#Adoption).
```

character type, like Python use strings of length one to serve the same purpose
a character data type. For more information see
[Character Literals Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Character_literal),
[Character Literals DBpedia](https://dbpedia.org/page/Character_literal)

## Proposal

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-   Every different literal value has its own type.
-   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is
    assigned to, not the literal itself. Follows the plan from #1934.

We will not support:

-   Multi-line literals
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#)
-   Empty character literals (`''`)
-   ASCII Control codes (0...31), except when specified with an escape sequence.
-   Whitespace characters other than word space: tab, line feed, carriage
    return, form feed, and vertical tab. See
    [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)

## Details

-   A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),

>     of UTF-8 code units that may or may not be a valid encoding.

Reviewer: It would be good to include this bit which was in the deleted encoding section.
```suggestion
    of UTF-8 code units that may or may not be a valid encoding. This matches
    [the UTF-8 encoding of Carbon source files](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0142.md#character-encoding).
```

to prioritize
[modern OS platforms, hardware architectures, and environments](/docs/project/goals.md#modern-os-platforms-hardware-architectures-and-environments).
This reflects the
[growing adoption of UTF-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8#Adoption).

## Alternatives considered

### No distinct character types

Unlike C++, Carbon will separate the integer and the character types, Carbon
character types add the information that the represented integer is a code unit
of some particular encoding. Whereas C++'s types `u8`, `u16`, and `u32` have the
wrong arithmetic semantics: we dont want wrapping. And many `uN` operations are
not meaningful on code units, unless you are implementing a conversion from code
units. Generally these cases should pierce the viel of abstraction and it's
probably reasonable to work with a `u8`, then explicitly convert it to the code
unit type when finished. Further, some operations want to be able to infer a
provided, intended to be UTF-8 string, rather than a unspecified encoded string
and to know if they have been given actual text or random bytes of data. For
these reasons, it will be useful for developer to document the meaning of a

> value, so using a distinct type is one way to do that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike C++, Carbon will separate the integer and the character types. We
considered using `u8`, `u16`, and `u32` instead of `Char8`, `Char16`, and
`Char32`to reduce the number of different types users needed to be aware of and
convert between. We decided against it because it came with a number of
disadvantages:

-   `u8`, `u16`, and `u32` have the wrong arithmetic semantics: we don't want
    wrapping, and many `uN` operations, like multiplication, division, and shift,
    are not meaningful on code units. There may be rare cases where you want
    to use those operations, such as if you're implementing a conversion to or
    from code units. But in those rare cases it would be reasonable for the user
    to convert to an integer type to perform that operation and convert back when
    done.
-   Some operations want to be able to tell the difference between values that are
    intended to be UTF-8 instead of having no specified encoding.
-   Some operations want to be able to know that they've been given text rather
    than random bytes of data. For example, `Print(0x41 as u8)` would be
    expected to print `"65"` while `Print('\x41')` and `Print(0x41 as Char8)` would
    be expected to print `"A"`.
-   It's useful for developers to document the intended meaning of a value, and
    using a distinct type is one way to do that.
```

    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal representing a single
        Unicode code point and an integer literal, this should produce a
        character literal if the result fits in a Unicode code point.
    -   If the `+` is used between two character literals this will produce an
        error.
-   Subtract: `-` Similar to the plus operator, this will subtract the value of
    the two characters.

    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal representing a single
        code point or code unit and an integer literal, this should produce a
        character literal as long as the result of the difference is in range.
    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals, which are both a
        single code point, this should produce an integer literal representing
        the difference between the code points.

    In cases where the `+` and `-` operators are used with a character literal
    and a non-integer non-literal, the character literal should be converted to
    the type of the other operand if possible. For example, in the expression
    `w - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `Char8`, the `'a'` literal will be converted
    to type `Char8`.

> There is intentionally no conversion from character literals to integer types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is intentionally no implicit conversion from character literals to integer types, but explicit conversions are permitted between character literals representing a single code point and integer types.
```
We would like to permit explicit conversions (with `as`) here.

is needed to work with a single element string. See [Rationale](#rationale) for
more examples showing more appropriate use of characters over using strings.

## Background

Character Literals by definition is a type of literal in programming for the
representation of a single character's value within the source code of a
computer program. Character literals between languages have some minor nuances
but are fundamentally designed for the same purpose. Languages that have a
dedicated character data type generally include character literals, for example
C++, Java, Swift to name a few. Whereas other languages that lack distinct
character type, like Python use strings of length one to serve the same purpose
a character data type. For more information see
[Character Literals Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Character_literal),
[Character Literals DBpedia](https://dbpedia.org/page/Character_literal)

## Proposal

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-   Every different literal value has its own type.
-   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is

>     assigned to, not the literal itself. Follows the plan from #1934.

Reviewer 3: I would adjust this to state up-front that the core of the design is to model code points and the fact that they have a single concrete numerically representable value.

I think you should also clarify at the beginning that this means *not* supporting the full space of grapheme clusters or direct modeling of specific code *unit* sequences, which should instead be modeled with normal string literals.

> We will not support:

Reviewer 3: I would suggest merging the exact list of restrictions from here into the details section, and just listing the high level concept here of only supporting things that have a printable unicode code point and not the various other formulations.

-   Multi-line literals
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#)
-   Empty character literals (`''`)
-   `\x` escape sequences

> -   Character literals that don't contain exactly one code point.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-   Character literals that don't contain exactly one Unicode code point.
```

And maybe link this to the Unicode documentation?

    literal, otherwise it will be rejected and produce an error.
-   For most purposes a character should be viewed as representing a grapheme
    cluster.
-   Value-preserving implicit conversions from character literals to code point
    or code unit types are permitted. In particular, a character literal
    converts to a UTF-8 code unit if it is less than or equal to 0x7F, and
    UTF-16 code unit if it is less than or equal to 0xFFFF.
-   Support for `\u` escape sequences.
-   Conversions from string literals to Unicode strings are implicit, even
    though the numeric values of the encoding may change.

Character literals cannot be written with these characters:

-   New line
-   Single quote (`'`), but can write `'` character as `'\''`
-   Back-slash (`\`), except when used to form an escape sequence. See
    [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)
-   Whitespace characters other than space (` `).
-   ASCII control codes (0...31).

### Types

We will have the types `Char8`, `Char16`, and `Char32` representing code units

> in UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32. `Char32` will also represent a valid code point.

Reviewer 3: I wonder, should this should get clarified a bit to pin down that these don't support *all* code units in UTF-8 or UTF-16, but only those which map directly to the complete value of a code point?

Or should we keep these as types that can be formed from character literals but also might be used for representing utf-8 or utf-16 encoded strings? @zygoloid @josh11b

For example following the
[String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)
and representing characters as integers with the behaviour inline with
[Integer Literals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0143.md).

This also supports our goal for
[Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)
by ensuring that every kind of character literal that exists in C++ can be
represented in a Carbon character literal. This is done in a way that is natural
to adopt, understand, easy to read by having explicit character types mapped to
the C++ character types and the correct associated encoding.

Finally, the choice to use Unicode and UTF-8 by default reflects the Carbon goal
to prioritize
[modern OS platforms, hardware architectures, and environments](/docs/project/goals.md#modern-os-platforms-hardware-architectures-and-environments).
This reflects the
[growing adoption of UTF-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8#Adoption).

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer 3: We should add an alternative of supporting grapheme clusters, and of supporting non-code-point code-units.

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1964)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Abstract](#abstract)
-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
    -   [Types](#types)
    -   [Operations](#operations)
    -   [Encoding](#encoding)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [Separate character and integer types](#separate-character-and-integer-types)
    -   [No Distinct Character Literal](#no-distinct-character-literal)
    -   [Supporting Prefix Declarations](#supporting-prefix-declarations)
    -   [Disallowing Numeric Escape Sequences](#disallowing-numeric-escape-sequences)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

This proposal specifies lexical rules for constant characters in Carbon:

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

Every different literal value has its own type. The bit width is determined by
the type of the variable the literal is assigned to, not the literal itself.

> Follows the plan from Open design idea:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-   Every different literal value has its own type.
-   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is
    assigned to, not the literal itself.

Follows the plan from open design idea
```

    though the numeric values of the encoding may change.

We can see whether the particular literal is represented in the variable's type
by only looking at the types.

```
let allowed: Char8 = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of `'a'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point 97, which can be converted to
`Char8` since 97 fits in 8 bits. Here, `Char8` is a type that can represent a
single 8-bit character, like C++'s `char8_t`. `Char8` is used for exposition and
is not part of this proposal.

```
let error1: Char8 = '😃';
let error2: Char8 = 'AB';
```

However these should produce errors. The type of `'😃'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point `0x1F603`, which is too big to fit
in 8 bits. The type of `'AB'` is a character literal that is a sequence of two
Unicode code points, which has no conversion to a type that only handles one.

It is important to point out that any `'\n'` and `'\u{A}'` would be of the same
type, as they are the same unicode entities `%0A`. However, `'\x0A'` will be
slightly different as any character following the `\x...` sequence

> representation is not the same as a Unicode character. For example:

Reviewer: This has changed with our character literals now being UTF-8.

```suggestion
All of `'\n'`, `'\u{A}'`, and `'\x0A'` represent the same character and so have
the same type. However, explicitly converting this character literal to another
character set might result in a character with a different value, but that still
represents the newline character.
```

```
var c1: EBCDICChar = '\x0A';

> var c2: EBCDICChar = '\n';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// 0x15 is the new line character in EBCDIC.
Assert('\n' as EBCDICChar == EBCDICChar.Make(0x15));
Assert('\x0A' as EBCDICChar != EBCDICChar.Make(0x0A));
```

```

Here we assume that `c1` will be the EBCDIC RPT character (0xA) and for `c2` to
be the EBCDIC NL character (0x15)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

### Operations

> From the previous examples, we should be able to use the following operators:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Character literals representing a single code point support the following operators:
```

-   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`
    -   If any of the comparison operators are used between a code point and a

>         code unit, this will produce an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

-   Plus: `+`. However the behaviour of this operator is distinct compared to

>     its use with Strings. Rather than a concatenation, this will add the value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Plus: `+`. However the behavior of this operator is different from
    its use with strings. Rather than a concatenation, this will add the value
```

    of the two characters:
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal representing a single
        Unicode code point and an integer literal, this should produce a
        character literal if the result fits in a Unicode code point. Similarly,
        `+` between a hex code like `'\xAB'` and an integer literal results in a

>         character literal if the result fits in a single byte.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        character literal if the result fits in a Unicode code point.
```

    -   If the `+` is used between two character literals this will produce an
        error.
-   Subtract: `-` Similar to the plus operator, this will subtract the value of
    the two characters.

    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal representing a single
        code point or code unit and an integer literal, this should produce a
        character literal as long as the result of the difference is in range.
    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals, which are either both
        a single code point or both a single code unit, this should produce an
        integer literal representing the difference between the code points or
        code units.
    -   If the `-` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this

>         will produce an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals, which are both
        a single code point, this should produce an
        integer literal representing the difference between the code points.
```

    In cases where the `+` and `-` operators are used with a character literal
    and a non-integer non-literal, the character literal should be converted to
    the type of the other operand if possible. For example, in the expression
    `w - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `Char`, the `'a'` literal will be converted

>     to type `Char`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `w - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `Char8`, the `'a'` literal will be converted
    to type `Char8`.
```

the C++ character types and the correct associated encoding.

Finally, the choice to use Unicode and UTF-8 by default reflects the Carbon goal
to prioritize
[modern OS platforms, hardware architectures, and environments](/docs/project/goals.md#modern-os-platforms-hardware-architectures-and-environments).
This reflects the
[growing adoption of UTF-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8#Adoption).

## Alternatives considered

### Separate character and integer types

Unlike C++, Carbon will separate the integer and the character types. Carbon
character types add the information that the represented integer is a code unit
of some particular encoding. Without knowing the encoding, it is ambiguous how
to interpret an integer value.

### No Distinct Character Literal

In principle, a character literal can be represented by reusing string literals
similar to how Python handles character literals, however this would prevent
performing operations on characters as integers. For example, the `+` operator
on strings is used for concatenation, but `+` on a character would change its
value.

```
    var a: Char8 = 'a';
    var b: Char8 = 'b';

    if (a < b) {
        a += 1;
    }
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add something about how comparison is useful for classifying code points?
```suggestion

Furthermore, many properties of Unicode characters are defined on ranges
of code points, motivating supporting comparison operators on code points.

```

When working with code points, there is an advantage to having a distinct
character literal. Primarily when discussing the readablity of the design
choice, and working with code points similar to the example above. When looking
at the two variables it is clear that `acute2` contains two code points, but
when using a `String` there is no way to evaluate if it is a single valid
character of multiple code points or two characters. `\u{301}\u{65}` is a valid
single character comprised of multiple code points resulting in `é`, however
this could easily be mistaken as a `String` comprised of two code points, for

> example `\u{400}\u{65}` which is two characters resulting in `Ѐe`.

Reviewer: This was accidentally left in
```suggestion
```

-   A character literal will model single Unicode code points that have a single
    concrete numerical representation. We will not be supporting other
    formulations like code unit sequences or grampheme clusters as these will be
    modeled with normal string literals.

## Details

-   A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),
    of UTF-8 code units that must be a valid encoding. This matches
    [the UTF-8 encoding of Carbon source files](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0142.md#character-encoding).
-   A character literal must encode exactly one code point.
-   It supports addition and subtraction. These operations produce another code
    point literal, or produce an error if the result is out of range.
-   Character literals support some back-slash (`\`) escape sequences, including
    `\t`, `\n`, `\r`, `\"`, `\'`, `\\`, `\0`, and `\u{HHHH...}`. See
    [String Literals: Escape sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences).
-   Character literals implicitly convert to Unicode strings, even though the

>     numeric values of the encoding may change.

Reviewer 3: We don't really have "Unicode strings" though, not sure what this means yet.

Is the goal to say:
```suggestion
-   Character literals implicitly convert to string literals, even though the
    numeric values of the encoding may change.
```

This makes sense, but I *wouldn't* expect the specific code unit sequence to change...

Or maybe the goal is to say something more broad like:
```suggestion
-   Character literals are expected to implicitly convert to string literals and to any Unicode string types, although the
    numeric values of the encoding may change to match the encoding of a particular string type.
```

(But maybe there is a cleaner way to phrase this...)

Reviewer 3: After reading the resolved thread, I think I understand better the point -- this is about the fact that the UTF-8 encoding != the UCS4 integer value necessarily.

I'd like to suggest dropping this entirely:
```suggestion
```

I lean towards this being an *explicit* operation to encode a character into a string.

My reasoning is that I think we want to nudge folks to use string literals, even ones containing only a single code point, unless there is utility in viewing it as code point with a numeric value. And it seems likely to be a small burden to convert (I hope)?

We will not support:

-   character literals that don't contain exactly one Unicode code point;
-   multi-line literals;
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#);
-   `\x` escape sequences;
-   character literals with a single quote (`'`) or back-slash (`\`), except as
    part of an escape sequence;
-   empty character literals (`''`);
-   ASCII control codes (0...31), including whitespace characters other than
    word space (tab, line feed, carriage return, form feed, and vertical tab),
    except when specified with an escape sequence.

### Types

We will have the types `Char8`, `Char16`, and `Char32` representing code units
in UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32, but we will not support all code units, but only
those which map directly to the complete value of a code point. However,

> character literals will use their own types distinct from these:

Reviewer 3: Further down, a "code point" type is mentioned, but not here. These are all UTF-encoding code unit types.

What do folks think about this proposal just proposing a code point type, and not getting into the different UTF-encoding code unit types? I feel like the encoding types would be better handled in a later proposal that actually defines the relevant standard library facilities for encoding, decoding, etc.

Here, what we need is some way to traffic at runtime in a single code point that might come from any different character literal, and that seems like a more simple and easy initial step. Thoughts?

If folks like this suggestion, I would still suggest keeping much of this content, but adjusting it and moving it to a future work section as guidance for that future encoding proposal. The points around checked conversions from a character literal to the code unit types seem really nice.

Reviewer: There is a tension here that you would need a large type like `Char32` to hold any code point, but it seems like we are going to allow using smaller types to hold smaller code points, so we can support things like `var c: Char8 = 'a';`.

Reviewer: Thinking about this further:

- I think it makes sense and will have applications to be able to store a code point in a `Char8`, `Char16`, or `Char32`, as long as it fits in the specified number of bits. People are going to at least want to 
- I don't think it makes sense to store code units in `u8`, `u16`, or a `u32`, since we don't want all those operations and wrapping behavior.
- I think it is reasonable to either introduce a new type for code units or to use the `CharN` types. If I am not mistaken, code points are a strict subset of code units, which causes me to think we should use the `CharN` types for both.

Reviewer 3: I agree we should use `CharN` types for both, but that means they are really code *unit* types.

I still think we should revisit this when we're actually fully building out encoding, decoding, etc. Right now, it seems hard to really even see the complete picture for me.

But I think there is utility in a type that can carry any runtime code *point*. I'm not especially worried about efficiency here, folks who need that would likely better operate on the `CharN` types once they are available.

I view this is more analogous to something like a `BigInt` type and its relationship with integer literals, with the handy benefit of us being able to trivially define the limits on the possible values it needs to represent.

Reviewer: I don't think there is a need for a `BigInt`-like type for code points. I believe all code points fit in a `Char32` and in fact 32-bit code points are the same as the 32-bit code units.

Author: This makes sense, thank you! For now I have created a new section for future work for UTF encoding types, and updated the type section to use `CharN` for both code points and code units

    though the numeric values of the encoding may change.

We can see whether the particular literal is represented in the variable's type
by only looking at the types.

```
let allowed: Char8 = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of `'a'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point 97, which can be converted to
`Char8` since 97 is less than or equal to 0x7F.

```
let error1: Char8 = '😃';
let error2: Char8 = 'AB';
```

However these should produce errors. The type of `'😃'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point `0x1F603`, which is greater than
0x7F. The type of `'AB'` is a character literal that is a sequence of two
Unicode code points, which is not valid.

Literals `'\n'` and `'\u{A}'` represent the same character and so have the same
type. However, explicitly converting this character literal to another character
set might result in a character with a different value, but that still
represents the newline character.

```
// 0x15 is the new line character in EBCDIC.
Assert('\n' as EBCDICChar == EBCDICChar.Make(0x15));
Assert('\u{A}' as EBCDICChar != EBCDICChar.Make(0x0A));

> ```

Reviewer 3: Is this section needed? I don't think we're considering an EBCDIC encoding type here?

I'm also not sure I agree with the second assert, but maybe we don't need to dive into that here/now.

Reviewer: I feel like it would be good to document how conversion from character literals to encoding-specific types ([Shift JIS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shift_JIS), etc.) is intended to work. To me it seems good if the resulting character matches what it looks like in the source code, which means doing a conversion from Unicode.

Reviewer 3: I agree, but I think we need to have a pretty complete view of encoding and decoding semantics to examine this effectively. For example, I would want to know how things are the same or different to doing an analogous operation on *string* literals, as well as strings, etc.

I'm mostly trying to restrict the scope here to the core things we really *need* in order to make the character literal part of the language work.

My hope is that the rest can be added as a more pure and focused standard library proposal.

### Operations

Character literals representing a single code point support the following
operators:

-   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`

> -   Plus: `+`. However the behavior of this operator is different from its use
>     with strings. Rather than a concatenation, this will add the value of the
>     two characters:
>     -   If the `+` is used between a character literal representing a single
>         Unicode code point and an integer literal, this should produce a
>         character literal if the result fits in a Unicode code point.
>     -   If the `+` is used between two character literals this will produce an
>         error.

Reviewer 3: The top bullet text doesn't seem to agree with the sub-bullet points...

Maybe:
```suggestion
-   Plus: `+`. This doesn't concatenate, but allows numerically adjusting the value:
    -   Only one operand may be a character literal, the other must be an integer literal.
    -   The result is the character literal whose numeric value is the sum of numeric value of the operands. If that sum is not a valid Unicode code point, it is an error.
```

But there may be even better phrasings.

Reviewer: Your rewrite is a lot more restrictive. Your rewrite says the only thing that can be added to a character literal is an integer literal, but that is not very useful or common compared to adding a non-literal integer.

-   Subtract: `-` Similar to the plus operator, this will subtract the value of
    the two characters.

    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal representing a single
        code point or code unit and an integer literal, this should produce a
        character literal as long as the result of the difference is in range.
    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals, which are both a
        single code point, this should produce an integer literal representing

>         the difference between the code points.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this is similar enough to plus for that to be helpful, so I would just describe this from scratch.

For `-`, I feel like `'z' - 4` makes sense, but `100 - 'a'` doesn't really, especially when producing a character literal type. For me this is because a negative character literal doesn't make much sense (unlike an integer literal). I'd be happy skipping subtraction entirely or making it non-commutative, thoughts?

Reviewer: - `'z' - 4` makes sense, and should result in a character constant
- `'z' - 'a'` makes sense, and should result in an integer constant
- `100 - 'a'` doesn't really make sense, unless you want to coerce the `100` into a character, reducing it to the previous case.

Reviewer 3: Just to check, I think that agrees with what I'm saying? Want to make sure I'm not missing an important distinction.

Reviewer: I think we agree, since I'm fine with rejecting `100 - 'a'` unless you explicitly cast the `100` to a character type.

    the type of the other operand if possible. For example, in the expression
    `w - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `Char8`, the `'a'` literal will be converted
    to type `Char8`.

There is intentionally no implicit conversion from character literals to integer
types, but explicit conversions are permitted between character literals and
integer types. Carbon will separate the integer types from character types
entirely.

## Rationale

This proposal supports the goal of making Carbon code
[easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write).
Adding support for a specific character literal supports clean, readable,
concise use and is a much more familiar concept that will make it easier to
adopt Carbon coming from other languages. Have a distinct character literal will
also allow us support useful operations designed to manipulate the literal's
value. When working with `String`, we use the `+` operator to concatenate
multiple `String`s, but say we wanted to advance a character to the next
literal. Using a `String` will produce a type error, as we are misusing the `+`

> operator: `"a" + 1`. However with a character literal, we can support operations

Reviewer 3: FWIW, I don't think it is decided that we will have the C++ `+` operator for concatenation on Carbon's String type -- I personally hope we don't.

-   We will support value preserving implicit conversions from character
    literals to code point or code unit types. In particular, a character
    literal converts to a `Char8` UTF-8 code unit if it is less than or equal to
    0x7F, and `Char16` UTF-16 code unit if it is less than or equal to 0xFFFF.
-   Conversions from string or character literals to a non-value-preserving
    encoding must be explicit.
-   Conversions from string literals to Unicode strings are implicit, even
    though the numeric values of the encoding may change.

We can see whether the particular literal is represented in the variable's type
by only looking at the types.

```
let allowed: Char8 = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of `'a'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point 97, which can be converted to
`Char8` since 97 is less than or equal to 0x7F.

```
let error1: Char8 = '😃';
let error2: Char8 = 'AB';
```

However these should produce errors. The type of `'😃'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point `0x1F603`, which is greater than
0x7F. The type of `'AB'` is a character literal that is a sequence of two

> Unicode code points, which has no conversion to a type that only handles a
> single UTF-8 code unit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unicode code points, which is not valid.
```

> All of `'\n'`, and `'\u{A}'` represent the same character and so have the same
> type. However, explicitly converting this character literal to another character

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Literals `'\n'` and `'\u{A}'` represent the same character and so have the same
type. However, explicitly converting this character literal to another character
```

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1964)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Abstract](#abstract)
-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
    -   [Types](#types)
    -   [Operations](#operations)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
    -   [No distinct character types](#no-distinct-character-types)
    -   [No distinct character literal](#no-distinct-character-literal)
    -   [Supporting prefix declarations](#supporting-prefix-declarations)
    -   [Allowing numeric escape sequences](#allowing-numeric-escape-sequences)
    -   [Supporting formulations of grapheme clusters and non-code-point code-units](#supporting-formulations-of-grapheme-clusters-and-non-code-point-code-units)
-   [Future Work](#future-work)
    -   [UTF code unit types proposal](#utf-code-unit-types-proposal)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

This proposal specifies lexical rules for constant characters in Carbon:

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-   Every different literal value has its own type.

> -   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is
>     assigned to, not the literal itself.

Reviewer 3: The wording of this bullet point was a little hard for me to follow. What do folks think about something more like the following?

```suggestion
-   The literal itself doesn't have a bit width as a consequence. Instead, variables use explicitly sized character types and character literals can be converted to these types when representable.
```

is needed to work with a single element string. See [Rationale](#rationale) for
more examples showing more appropriate use of characters over using strings.

## Background

Character Literals by definition is a type of literal in programming for the
representation of a single character's value within the source code of a
computer program. Character literals between languages have some minor nuances
but are fundamentally designed for the same purpose. Languages that have a
dedicated character data type generally include character literals, for example
C++, Java, Swift to name a few. Whereas other languages that lack distinct
character type, like Python use strings of length one to serve the same purpose
a character data type. For more information see
[Character Literals Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Character_literal),
[Character Literals DBpedia](https://dbpedia.org/page/Character_literal)

## Proposal

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-   Every different literal value has its own type.
-   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is

>     assigned to, not the literal itself. Follows the plan from #1934.

Reviewer 3: Whatever wording tweak is used above should also be reflected here.

-   A character literal will model single Unicode code points that have a single
    concrete numerical representation. We will not be supporting other
    formulations like code unit sequences or grapheme clusters as these will be
    modeled with normal string literals.

## Details

-   A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),
    of UTF-8 code units that must be a valid encoding. This matches
    [the UTF-8 encoding of Carbon source files](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0142.md#character-encoding).
-   A character literal must encode exactly one code point.
-   It supports addition and subtraction, [as described below](#operations).

> -   Character literals support some back-slash (`\`) escape sequences, including
>     `\t`, `\n`, `\r`, `\"`, `\'`, `\\`, `\0`, and `\u{HHHH...}`. See
>     [String Literals: Escape sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences).

Reviewer 3: I think I understand the goal here, but just some suggestions to hopefully make it explicit that this is intended to be a subset that are relevant in this context. Although someone else may see an even better way to phrase things.

```suggestion
-   Character literals will support the relevant subset of the backslash (`\`) escape sequences in string literals, including
    `\t`, `\n`, `\r`, `\"`, `\'`, `\\`, `\0`, and `\u{HHHH...}`. See
    [String Literals: Escape sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences).
    -   Escape sequences which would result in non-UTF-8 encodings or more than one code point are not included.
    -   The escape of an embedded newline is also excluded as it isn't expected to be relevant for character literals.
```

We will not support:

> -   character literals that don't contain exactly one Unicode code point;
> -   multi-line literals;
> -   "raw" literals (using #'x'#);
> -   `\x` escape sequences;
> -   character literals with a single quote (`'`) or back-slash (`\`), except as
>     part of an escape sequence
> -   empty character literals (`''`);

Reviewer 3: For consistency with the above, I'd guess we should exclude newlines:

```suggestion
-   character literals that don't contain exactly one Unicode code point;
-   multi-line literals;
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#);
-   `\x` escape sequences;
-   character literals with a single quote (`'`) or back-slash (`\`), except as
    part of an escape sequence;
-   empty character literals (`''`);
-   a backslash followed by an (unescaped) newline;
```

-   ASCII control codes (0...31), including whitespace characters other than
    word space (tab, line feed, carriage return, form feed, and vertical tab),
    except when specified with an escape sequence.

### Types

For the time being we will support character types `Char8`, `Char16`, and
`Char32` that will hold both code units and code points, and will leave the
different UTF-encoding code unit types to another proposal. See
[UTF code unit types proposal](#utf-code-unit-types-proposal).

We will have the type `CharN` and only support literals that map directly to the
complete value of a code point.

```
let allowed: CharN = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of `'a'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point 97, which can be converted to
`CharN` since 97 is less than or equal to 0x7F.

> 

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure this section as written is working for me.

I think you're trying to say that the literal will only convert to a character type that can represent that code point directly?

Maybe an example with the three specific types, and associated character literals would work better here?

### Operations

Character literals representing a single code point support the following
operators:

-   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`
-   Plus: `+`. This doesn't concatenate, but allows numerically adjusting the
    value:
    -   Only one operand may be a character literal, the other must be an
        integer literal.
    -   The result is the character literal whose numeric value is the sum of
        numeric value of the operands. If that sum is not a valid Unicode code
        point, it is an error.
-   Subtract: `-`. This will subtract the value of the two characters, or a
    character followed by an integer literal:
    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals, the result will be a
        character constant `'z' - 4`.
    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal, followed by a integer

>         literal this will produce an integer constant `'z' - 'a'`.

Reviewer 4: I think you swapped the examples:
the first example should be `'z' - 'a'`,
and the second example should be `'z' - '4'`.

Reviewer: There is a mistake here, but it isn't as simple as swapping those two. I'll come up with a fix.

>     -   If the `-` is used between two character literals, the result will be a
>         character constant `'z' - 4`.
>     -   If the `-` is used between a character literal, followed by a integer
>         literal this will produce an integer constant `'z' - 'a'`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals, the result will be an
        integer constant. For example, `'z' - 'a'` is equivalent to `25`.
    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal followed by a integer
        literal, this will produce a character constant. For example `'z' - 4`
        is equivalent to `'v'`.
```

        a character.

There is intentionally no implicit conversion from character literals to integer
types, but explicit conversions are permitted between character literals and
integer types. Carbon will separate the integer types from character types
entirely.

## Rationale

This proposal supports the goal of making Carbon code
[easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write).
Adding support for a specific character literal supports clean, readable,
concise use and is a much more familiar concept that will make it easier to
adopt Carbon coming from other languages. Have a distinct character literal will
also allow us support useful operations designed to manipulate the literal's
value. When working with an explicit character type we can use operators that
have unique behavior, for example say we wanted to advance a character to the
next literal. In other languages the `+` operator is often used for
concatenation, so using a `String` will produce a type error: `"a" + 1`. However
with a character literal, we can support operations for these use cases:

```
var b: u8;

b = 'a' + 1;
b + 1 == 'c';

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

and representing characters as integers with the behaviour inline with
[Integer Literals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0143.md).

This also supports our goal for
[Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)
by ensuring that every kind of character literal that exists in C++ can be
represented in a Carbon character literal. This is done in a way that is natural
to adopt, understand, easy to read by having explicit character types mapped to
the C++ character types and the correct associated encoding.

Finally, the choice to use Unicode and UTF-8 by default reflects the Carbon goal
to prioritize
[modern OS platforms, hardware architectures, and environments](/docs/project/goals.md#modern-os-platforms-hardware-architectures-and-environments).
This reflects the
[growing adoption of UTF-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8#Adoption).

## Alternatives considered

### No distinct character types

Unlike C++, Carbon will separate the integer and the character types. We
considered using `u8`, `u16`, and `u32` instead of `Char8`, `Char16`, and

> `Char32`to reduce the number of different types users needed to be aware of and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Char32` to reduce the number of different types users needed to be aware of and
```

Character Literals by definition is a type of literal in programming for the
representation of a single character's value within the source code of a
computer program. Character literals between languages have some minor nuances
but are fundamentally designed for the same purpose. Languages that have a
dedicated character data type generally include character literals, for example
C++, Java, Swift to name a few. Whereas other languages that lack distinct
character type, like Python use strings of length one to serve the same purpose
a character data type. For more information see
[Character Literals Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Character_literal),
[Character Literals DBpedia](https://dbpedia.org/page/Character_literal)

## Proposal

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

-   Every different literal value has its own type.
-   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is
    assigned to, not the literal itself. Follows the plan from #1934.
-   A character literal will model single Unicode code points that have a single
    concrete numerical representation. We will not be supporting other

>     formulations like code unit sequences or grampheme clusters as these will be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    formulations like code unit sequences or grapheme clusters as these will be
```

    modeled with normal string literals.

## Details

-   A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),
    of UTF-8 code units that must be a valid encoding. This matches
    [the UTF-8 encoding of Carbon source files](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0142.md#character-encoding).
-   A character literal must encode exactly one code point.

> -   It supports addition and subtraction. These operations produce another code
>     point literal, or produce an error if the result is out of range.

Reviewer 2: I think the rules we want here are more complicated than this, and you spell them out below in the "Operations" section. I think we could say this here:

```suggestion
-   It supports addition and subtraction of integer literals. These operations produce another code
    point literal, or produce an error if the result is out of range.
```

... but I think this is better:

```suggestion
-   It supports addition and subtraction, [as described below](#operations).
```

-   empty character literals (`''`);
-   ASCII control codes (0...31), including whitespace characters other than
    word space (tab, line feed, carriage return, form feed, and vertical tab),
    except when specified with an escape sequence.

### Types

For the time being we will support character types `Char8`, `Char16`, and
`Char32` that will hold both code units and code points, and will leave the
different UTF-encoding code unit types to another proposal. See
[UTF code unit types proposal](#utf-code-unit-types-proposal).

We will have the type `CharN` and only support literals that map directly to the
complete value of a code point.

```
let allowed: CharN = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of `'a'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point 97, which can be converted to
`CharN` since 97 is less than or equal to 0x7F.

### Operations

Character literals representing a single code point support the following
operators:

-   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`
-   Plus: `+`. This doesn't concatenate, but allows numerically adjusting the
    value:
    -   Only one operand may be a character literal, the other must be an

>         integer literal.

Reviewer 2: One consequence appears to be that this is invalid:

```
fn Digit(n: i8) -> Char32 {
  return '0' + n;
}
```

... and something like `return ('0' as Char32) + n;` would be needed instead. I think I'm OK with that, but I expect it to be a minor source of friction as that kind of usage is fairly common in C++.

Reviewer: Given that `'0' + n` has a value that is only known at runtime, what type should it be? Using the type of `n` here is a bit worrisome, due to overflow. I would be fine with saying the result would be `Char32`, but maybe that would only make sense for some types of `n`? For example if `n: i64`, a `Char32` result would be surprising.

Reviewer 3: I think I like keeping this super-explicit for now (requiring a cast to a specific sized type). We can try to add better defaults if in practice this friction is something users dislike. I'm somewhat hopeful that instead we can have a really easily discovered (and targeted in migration) API for mapping to digits, and avoid how much this comes up in practice. But it seems easy to address if it does come up.

This proposal specifies lexical rules for constant characters in Carbon:

Put character literals in single quotes, like `'a'`. Character literals work
like numeric literals:

Every different literal value has its own type. The bit width is determined by
the type of the variable the literal is assigned to, not the literal itself.
Follows the plan from Open design idea:

> [Character Literals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/1934).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[#1934: Character Literals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/1934).
```

-   Every different literal value has its own type.
-   The bit width is determined by the type of the variable the literal is
    assigned to, not the literal itself. Follows the plan from #1934.
-   A character literal will model single Unicode code points that have a single
    concrete numerical representation. We will not be supporting other
    formulations like code unit sequences or grampheme clusters as these will be
    modeled with normal string literals.

## Details

-   A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),

>     of UTF-8 code units that may or may not be a valid encoding. This matches

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    of UTF-8 code units that must be a valid encoding. This matches
```

    [the UTF-8 encoding of Carbon source files](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0142.md#character-encoding).

> -   If a character literal encodes exactly one code point, then it supports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   A character literal must encode exactly one code point.
-   It supports
```

    addition and subtraction. These operations produce another code point

>     literal, otherwise it will be rejected and produce an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    literal, or produce an error if the result is out of range.
```

> -   Support for `\u` escape sequences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Character literals support some back-slash (`\`) escape sequences, including `\t`,
    `\n`, `\r`, `\"`, `\'`, `\\`, `\0`, and `\u{HHHH...}`. See
    [String Literals: Escape sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences).
```

-   Conversions from string literals to Unicode strings are implicit, even

>     though the numeric values of the encoding may change.

Reviewer: Not sure why there is something about string literals here. Is this supposed to be:

```suggestion
-   Character literals implicitly convert to Unicode strings, even
    though the numeric values of the encoding may change.
```

Perhaps the "even though the numeric values of the encoding may change" should be a separate point with an example to clarify what it means?

>     We will not support:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will not support:
```

> -   Character literals that don't contain exactly one Unicode code point.

Reviewer: Each bullet should be something that completes "We we not support..."
```suggestion
-   character literals that don't contain exactly one Unicode code point;
```

> -   New line and multi-line literals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   multi-line literals;
```

-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#)

> -   `\x` escape sequences

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#);
-   `\x` escape sequences;
```

> -   Single quote (`'`), but can write `'` character as `'\''`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   character literals with a single quote (`'`) or back-slash (`\`), except as part
    of an escape sequence
```

> -   Empty character literals (`''`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   empty character literals (`''`);
```

> -   ASCII Control codes (0...31), except when specified with an escape sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   ASCII control codes (0...31), including whitespace characters other than word
    space (tab, line feed, carriage return, form feed, and vertical tab), except when
    specified with an escape sequence.
```

-   Whitespace characters other than word space: tab, line feed, carriage
    return, form feed, and vertical tab. And Back-slash (`\`), see

>     [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

-   Multi-line literals
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#)
-   Empty character literals (`''`)
-   ASCII Control codes (0...31), except when specified with an escape sequence.
-   Whitespace characters other than word space: tab, line feed, carriage
    return, form feed, and vertical tab. See
    [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)

> ## Details

Reviewer: Just a note to add the conclusion from https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/1028052594070929499/1028081432251338833
to this section.

## Details

-   A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),
    of UTF-8 code units that must be a valid encoding. This matches
    [the UTF-8 encoding of Carbon source files](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0142.md#character-encoding).
-   A character literal must encode exactly one code point.
-   It supports addition and subtraction. These operations produce another code
    point literal, or produce an error if the result is out of range.
-   Character literals support some back-slash (`\`) escape sequences, including
    `\t`, `\n`, `\r`, `\"`, `\'`, `\\`, `\0`, and `\u{HHHH...}`. See
    [String Literals: Escape sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences).
-   Character literals implicitly convert to Unicode strings, even though the

>     numeric values of the encoding may change.

Reviewer: @zygoloid Is there a situation where the numeric encoding will change when converting to a string now, or have our changes removed that possibility?

Reviewer 2: I'm interpreting this as meaning: you can convert a character literal to a string, and the code point will be encoded in the encoding of the string (which I expect will be UTF-8). So, the encoding changes from UCS4 to UTF-8, but the encoded code point does not change. I think that's fine.

We will not support:

-   character literals that don't contain exactly one Unicode code point;
-   multi-line literals;
-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#);
-   `\x` escape sequences;
-   character literals with a single quote (`'`) or back-slash (`\`), except as

>     part of an escape sequence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    part of an escape sequence;
```

-   empty character literals (`''`);
-   ASCII control codes (0...31), including whitespace characters other than
    word space (tab, line feed, carriage return, form feed, and vertical tab),
    except when specified with an escape sequence.

### Types

> We will not support all code units in UTF-8 or UTF-16, but only those which map
> directly to the complete value of a code point
> 

Reviewer: Looks like you say this in the next paragraph, so no need to repeat it.

```suggestion
```

## Details

-   A character literal is a sequence enclosed with single quotes delimiter ('),
    of UTF-8 code units that may or may not be a valid encoding. If a character
    literal is encodes exactly one code point, then it supports arithmetic,
    producing another code point, or a runtime CodePoint (Type name TBD) value
    if necessary, however for most purposes a character should be viewed as a

>     grapheme cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    of UTF-8 code units that may or may not be a valid encoding.
-   If a character literal encodes exactly one code point, then it supports
    addition and subtraction. These operations produce another code
    point literal, if the value can be determined at compile time, or a
    runtime `Char32` code point value.
-   For most purposes a character should be viewed as representing a
    grapheme cluster.
```

-   Value-preserving implicit conversions from character literals to code point
    or code unit types are permitted. In particular, a character literal
    converts to a UTF-8 code unit if it is less than or equal to 0x7F, and
    UTF-16 code unit if it is less than or equal to 0xFFFF.
-   `\x` escape sequences produce the given code unit. But UTF-8 is assumed, so
    `'\xC3\x89'` is the same thing as `'É'`, and is valid encoded single code

>     point so arithmetic on it is permitted. encoding are explicit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `\x` escape sequences produce the given code unit. Character literals are
    assumed to use a UTF-8 encoding. So `'\xC3\x89'` is the same thing as `'É'`,
    a valid encoding of a single code point, and so allows addition and subtraction.
```

-   Conversions from string literals to Unicode strings are implicit, even
    though the numeric values of the encoding may change.

>     A character literal will exclude:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Character literals cannot be written with these characters:
```

-   Single quote (`'`), but can write `'` character as `'\''`
-   Back-slash (`\`), except when used to form an escape sequence. See
    [String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)
-   Whitespace characters other than space (` `).
-   ASCII control codes (0...31).

### Types

We will represent a character literal as a sequence consisting of elements that
are each either a unicode code-point or a hex-encoded byte value.

We can see whether the particular literal is represented in the variable's type
by only looking at the types:

```
let allowed: Char8 = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of `'a'` indicates that it can be

> converted to `Char8`. Here, `Char8` is a type that can represent a single 8-bit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above is allowed because the type of `'a'` is the character literal consisting
of the single Unicode code point 97, which can be converted to `Char8` since
97 fits in 8 bits. Here, `Char8` is a type that can represent a single 8-bit
```

character, like C++'s `char8_t`. `Char8` is used for exposition and is not part
of this proposal.

```
let error1: Char8 = '😃';
let error2: Char8 = 'AB';
```

However these should produce errors, the types of `'😃'` and `'AB'` indicate

> that they cannot be converted to the declared type `Char8`. It is important to

Reviewer: It is important to say what goes wrong to explain why these cases are errors.

```suggestion
However these should produce errors. The type of `'😃'` is the character
literal consisting of the single Unicode code point `0x1F603`, which is too big
to fit in 8 bits. The type of `'AB'` is a character literal that is a sequence
of two Unicode code points, which has no conversion to a type that only
handles one.

It is important to
```

point out that any `'\n'` and `'\u{A}'` would be of the same type, as they are

> the same unicode entities `%0A`. It is worth noting that `'\x0A'` will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same unicode entities `%0A`. However, `'\x0A'` will be
```

-   "raw" literals (using #'x'#);
-   `\x` escape sequences;
-   character literals with a single quote (`'`) or back-slash (`\`), except as
    part of an escape sequence
-   empty character literals (`''`);
-   ASCII control codes (0...31), including whitespace characters other than
    word space (tab, line feed, carriage return, form feed, and vertical tab),
    except when specified with an escape sequence.

### Types

> For the time being we will support a type `CharN` that will hold both code units

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the time being we will support character types `Char8`,
 `Char16`, and `Char32` that will hold both code units
```

and code points, and will leave the different UTF-encoding code unit types to
another proposal. See

> [UTF code unit types proposal](#utf-code-unit-types-proposal))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[UTF code unit types proposal](#utf-code-unit-types-proposal).
```

### Types

We will have the types `Char8`, `Char16`, and `Char32` representing code units
in UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32. `Char32` will represent a valid code point that

> align with the rules stated in [encoding](#encoding)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32. `Char32` will also represent a valid code point.
However, character literals will use their own types distinct from these:
```

-   We will represent a character literal as a sequence consisting of elements

>     that are each either a unicode code-point or a hex-encoded byte value.

Reviewer: I don't think this bullet point is is true anymore. The previous section says a character literal is "a sequence of UTF-8 code units that may or may not be a valid encoding," which should be enough, no need to say anything more here.
```suggestion
```

-   We will support value preserving implicit conversions from character
    literals to code point or code unit types. In particular, a character
    literal converts to a UTF-8 code unit if it is less than or equal to 0x7F,

>     and UTF-16 code unit if it is less than or equal to 0xFFFF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    literal converts to a `Char8` UTF-8 code unit if it is less than or equal to 0x7F,
    and `Char16` UTF-16 code unit if it is less than or equal to 0xFFFF.
```

-   `\x` escape sequences produce the given code unit. But UTF-8 is assumed, so
    `'\xC3\x89'` is the same thing as `'É'`, and is valid encoded single code

>     point.

Reviewer: Seems to be repeating what was written in details already?
```suggestion
```

-   Conversions from string or character literals to a non-value-preserving

>     encoding are explicit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    encoding must be explicit.
```

-   Conversions from string literals to Unicode strings are implicit, even
    though the numeric values of the encoding may change.

We can see whether the particular literal is represented in the variable's type
by only looking at the types.

```
let allowed: Char8 = 'a';
```

The above is allowed because the type of `'a'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point 97, which can be converted to
`Char8` since 97 fits in 8 bits. Here, `Char8` is a type that can represent a
single 8-bit character, like C++'s `char8_t`. `Char8` is used for exposition and

> is not part of this proposal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Char8` since 97 fits it is less than or equal to 0x7F.
```

```
let error1: Char8 = '😃';
let error2: Char8 = 'AB';
```

However these should produce errors. The type of `'😃'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point `0x1F603`, which is too big to fit
in 8 bits. The type of `'AB'` is a character literal that is a sequence of two

> Unicode code points, which has no conversion to a type that only handles one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consisting of the single Unicode code point `0x1F603`, which is greater than
0x7F. The type of `'AB'` is a character literal that is a sequence of two
Unicode code points, which has no conversion to a type that only handles a
single UTF-8 code unit.
```

-   Comparison: `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=` `==`
    -   If any of the comparison operators are used between a code point and a
        code unit, this will produce an error.
-   Plus: `+`. However the behaviour of this operator is distinct compared to
    its use with Strings. Rather than a concatenation, this will add the value
    of the two characters:
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,
        this should produce a character literal if the result fits into a
        Unicode code point or for a unicode hex code like `'\xAB'`, a single

>         byte.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   If the `+` is used between a character literal representing a single
        Unicode code point and an integer literal, this should produce a
        character literal if the result fits in a Unicode code point.
        Similarly, `+` between a hex code like `'\xAB'` and an integer literal
        results in a character literal if the result fits in a single byte.
```

>     -   If the `+` is used between a character literal and an integer

Reviewer: I think this should be updated or deleted, see https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/1028052594070929499/1028082818582073344

        non-literal this will produce an error.
    -   If the `+` is used between two character literals this will produce an
        error.
-   Subtract: `-` Similar to the plus operator, this will subtract the value of
    the two characters.

    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer literal,

>         this should produce a character literal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   If the `-` is used between a character literal representing a single code
        point or code unit and an integer literal, this should produce a character
        literal as long as the result of the difference is in range.
```

    -   If the `-` is used between two character literals, which are either both
        a single code point or both a single code unit, this should produce an
        integer literal representing the difference between the code points or
        code units.

>     -   If the `-` is used between a character literal and an integer

Reviewer: This bullet should be updated or deleted too.

        non-literal this will produce an error.
    -   If the `-` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this
        will produce an error.

    In other use cases where the `+` and `-` operators are used, in theory we

>     should convert the character literal to some other type first. For example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In cases where the `+` and `-` operators are used with a character literal
    and a non-integer non-literal, the character literal should be converted to
    the type of the other operand if possible. For example,
```

    if we want to call `w - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `char` we would want to

>     convert the `'a'` literal to a `char`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    in the expression `w - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `Char`, the `'a'` literal
    will be converted to type `Char`.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

There is intentionally no conversion from character literals to integer types.
Carbon will separate the integer types from character types entirely. 

```

The above is allowed because the type of `'a'` is the character literal
consisting of the single Unicode code point 97, which can be converted to

> `Char8` since 97 fits it is less than or equal to 0x7F.

Reviewer: Sorry, the text I suggested had a mistake.
```suggestion
`Char8` since 97 is less than or equal to 0x7F.
```

        a single code point or both a single code unit, this should produce an
        integer literal representing the difference between the code points or
        code units.
    -   If the `-` operator is used between a code point and a code unit, this
        will produce an error.

    In cases where the `+` and `-` operators are used with a character literal
    and a non-integer non-literal, the character literal should be converted to
    the type of the other operand if possible. For example, in the expression
    `w - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `Char`, the `'a'` literal will be converted
    to type `Char`.

There is intentionally no conversion from character literals to integer types.
Carbon will separate the integer types from character types entirely.

### Encoding

-   A character literal is a sequence of UTF-8 code units that may or may not be
    a valid encoding. If a character literal encodes exactly one code point
    `Char32`, then it supports arithmetic, producing another code point, or a
    runtime CodePoint (Type name TBD) value if necessary. For more information
    about source encoding see

>     [Unicode source files](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0142.md#character-encoding).

Reviewer: This seems like it has a lot of overlap with the "details" section. Might be best to just delete this section and move anything that additional in this section to "details."

This proposal supports the goal of making Carbon code
[easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write).
Adding support for a specific character literal supports clean, readable,
concise use and is a much more familiar concept that will make it easier to

> adopt Carbon coming from other languages. Have a distinct character literally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adopt Carbon coming from other languages. Have a distinct character literal
```

> will also allow us support useful operations designed to manipulate the literals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will also allow us support useful operations designed to manipulate the literal's
```

    `w - 'a'`, where `w` is of type `Char8`, the `'a'` literal will be converted
    to type `Char8`.

There is intentionally no implicit conversion from character literals to integer
types, but explicit conversions are permitted between character literals

> representing a single code point and integer types. Carbon will separate the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and integer types. Carbon will separate the
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Separate character and integer types

Unlike C++, Carbon will separate the integer and the character types. Carbon
character types add the information that the represented integer is a code unit
of some particular encoding. Without knowing the encoding, it is ambiguous how
to interpret an integer value.

```

Reviewer: Should also include the reasons from #text: https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/1028052594070929499/1028108662964760577

It would probably be good to add to the "details" a section saying that we would have the types `Char8`, `Char16`, and `Char32` representing code units in UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32. `Char32` would also represent a Unicode code point for the "A character literal that encodes exactly one code point supports arithmetic, producing another code point" rule.

### No Distinct Character Literal

> In principle a character literal can be represented by reusing string literals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In principle, a character literal can be represented by reusing string literals
```

similar to how Python handles character literals, however this would lead to
some disadvatages. There are situations where using operations can be given more
practical use. When using `Strings` the `+` operator, is used for concatenating
two `String` objects, essentially rendering it useless when working with
characters. With a distinct character literal we can support more useful
operations, for example by using the `+` operator to advance the character

> literal to the next representable literal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
similar to how Python handles character literals, however this would prevent
performing operations on characters as integers. For example, the `+` operator
on strings is used for concatenation, but `+` on a character would change its
value.
```

```
    var a: u8 = 'a';

>     var b: u8 = 'b';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    var a: Char8 = 'a';
    var b: Char8 = 'b';
```

    if (a < b) {
        a += 1;
    }
```

Another example of this would be looking at the `==` and other comparison
operators when working with characters represented with code points. Below is an
example of representing the character `é` with code points. `acute1` is using
the single code point representation and `acute2` is combining the `e` and
`acute accent mark` code points to represent the character. However when they
are evaluated with the `==` operator the result is `false`.

```
  var acute1: String = "\u{E9}";
  var acute2: String = "\u{301}\u{65}";
  var matching: auto = if acute1 == acute2 then true else false; //output false

> ```

Reviewer: I'm not sure why this is here: it does not seem to be a difference between strings and character literals, since `'\u{301}\u{65}'` is also a valid character literal in this proposal.

When working with code points, there is an advantage to having a distinct
character literal. Primarily when discussing the readablity of the design
choice, and working with code points similar to the example above. When looking
at the two variables it is clear that `acute2` contains two code points, but
when using a `String` there is no way to evaluate if it is a single valid
character of multiple code points or two characters. `\u{301}\u{65}` is a valid
single character comprised of multiple code points resulting in `é`, however
this could easily be mistaken as a `String` comprised of two code points, for
example `\u{400}\u{65}` which is two characters resulting in `Ѐe`.

### Supporting Prefix Declarations

No support is proposed for prefix declarations like `u`, `U`, or `L`. In
practice they are used to specify the character literal types and their encoding
in languages like C and C++. There are a several benefits to omitting prefix
declarations; improved readablitly, simplifying how a character's type is

> determened, and how we are encoding character literals. When declaring a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
determined, and how we are encoding character literals. When declaring a
```

## Alternatives considered

### No Distinct Character Literal

In principle a character literal can be represented by reusing string literals.
//TODO: Add Description

```
    var b: String = "b";
    var c: String = "c";
    if (c > b) {
        b = c + b;
    }
```

We would simply this as a single element string. However it terms of
readablility, if we had a distinct lexical syntax for character literals versus
string literals, this would be more inline with Carbon's language design goals
related to self documenting code, easy to read, understand, write and C++
interopability.

### Supporting Prefix Declarations

No support is proposed for prefix declarations like `u`, `U`, or `L`. In
practice they are used to specify the character literal types in languages like
C and C++, supporting these could help with the familiarity of coming to Carbon
with a more C++ or C background. Supporting this will help support a much
cleaner and readable syntax that is more inline with Carbon's goals, i.e
[Rationale](#rationale).

> ### Disallowing Numeric Escape Sequences

Reviewer: Why hasn't this alternative been adopted? It seems like a straightforward simplification. With this alternative, a character literal would just represent one or more Unicode code points.

Right now it isn't clear to me what the benefit of writing `'\xAB'` is over writing `0xAB`. It isn't clear to me if they result in a value that acts differently in context -- I would expect `var c: u8 = 0x0A;` and `var c: u8 = '\x0A';` to be equivalent -- they both describe the literal with value `10` that will be implicitly converted to the variable's type. I don't think there is any reason to have a second longer way of writing that hex constant unless there is some difference.

If you don't think we should adopt this alternative, please include an example that demonstrates the benefit of using the `\x...` syntax.

Author: That's a good point essentially not supporting `x/...` and enforcing hex code points to be written with the `0xAB` notation. off the top of my head I don't know of a good example/advantage here. @zygoloid, what are your thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: I briefly mentioned some thoughts on this in [this comment](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1964#discussion_r966413187) -- there are clearly some advantages to this approach in terms of simplicity, and I think we should make that change unless the disadvantages outweigh those benefits. I think there are (at least) three disadvantages that we should consider:

-   A decrease in readability. Eg, if I write `var first_digit: char = 0;` then it's not clear whether I really meant a NUL character or if I forgot the `'`s and meant a zero digit. Whereas if I write either `var first_digit: char = '0';` or `var first_digit: char = '\0';` then either way it's clearer what I intended.
-   A decrease in type-safety. If we don't have code unit escapes in character literals, and we use integer literals instead, then that implies that we permit initializing character types from integer literals, much as in the example in the previous bullet. And for consistency, that presumably means we'll permit implicit conversion from non-constant integer-valued expressions to character types too (and maybe even in the other direction!), which erodes our ability to distinguish between characters and numbers in the type system.
-   A decrease in consistency. I'm assuming that we will still provide code unit escapes within string literals, so we will have functionality for naming a character in a string literal that is not available in a character literal. Alternatively, we could remove these escapes from string literals too, which brings with it its own set of costs to consider.

Hm. When I started writing this comment I was in favor of removing `\x` escapes from character literals, but now ... maybe they're worth the complexity?

Author: I see, thank you! I agree, worth the complexity

Not support escaping numeric sequences. This would simplify some of the design

> choices seen above by making types, the resctrictions and behavior of character

Reviewer: ```suggestion
choices seen above by making types, the restrictions and behavior of character
```

literals simpler. Specifically [Types](#types) of `EBCDIC`, by disallowing the
`\x...` pattern. This would restrict users by having to use the specific hex

> value, and when to use operations between character literals and benifitying the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
value, and when to use operations between character literals and benefiting the
```

> readablilty of Carbon in some use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
readability of Carbon in some use cases.
```

## Alternatives considered

> ### No Distinct Character Types

Reviewer: See https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md , we generally use sentence case for proposal section headings.
```suggestion
### No distinct character types
```

Unlike C++, Carbon will separate the integer and the character types. We
considered using `u8`, `u16`, and `u32` instead of `Char8`, `Char16`, and
`Char32`to reduce the number of different types users needed to be aware of and
convert between. We decided against it because it came with a number of
disadvantages:

-   `u8`, `u16`, and `u32` have the wrong arithmetic semantics: we don't want
    wrapping, and many `uN` operations, like multiplication, division, and
    shift, are not meaningful on code units. There may be rare cases where you
    want to use those operations, such as if you're implementing a conversion to
    or from code units. But in those rare cases it would be reasonable for the
    user to convert to an integer type to perform that operation and convert
    back when done.
-   Some operations want to be able to tell the difference between values that
    are intended to be UTF-8 instead of having no specified encoding.
-   Some operations want to be able to know that they've been given text rather
    than random bytes of data. For example, `Print(0x41 as u8)` would be

>     expected to print `"65"` while `Print('\u0041')` and `Print(0x41 as Char8)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    expected to print `"65"` while `Print('\u{41}')` and `Print(0x41 as Char8)`
```

    would be expected to print `"A"`.
-   It's useful for developers to document the intended meaning of a value, and
    using a distinct type is one way to do that.

> ### No Distinct Character Literal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### No distinct character literal
```

## Alternatives considered

### No distinct character types

> Unlike C++, Carbon will separate the integer and the character types, Carbon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike C++, Carbon will separate the integer and the character types. Carbon
```

[String Literals: Escaping Sequence](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0199.md#escape-sequences-1)
and representing characters as integers with the behaviour inline with
[Integer Literals](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p0143.md).

This also supports our goal for
[Interoperability with and migration from existing C++ code](/docs/project/goals.md#interoperability-with-and-migration-from-existing-c-code)
by ensuring that every kind of character literal that exists in C++ can be
represented in a Carbon character literal. This is done in a way that is natural
to adopt, understand, easy to read by having explicit character types mapped to
the C++ character types and the correct associated encoding.

Finally, the choice to use Unicode and UTF-8 by default reflects the Carbon goal
to prioritize
[modern OS platforms, hardware architectures, and environments](/docs/project/goals.md#modern-os-platforms-hardware-architectures-and-environments).
This reflects the
[growing adoption of UTF-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8#Adoption).

## Alternatives considered

> ### Separate character and integer types

Reviewer: "Separate character and integer types" is the alternative we selected, not the alternative we considered but rejected.
```suggestion
### No distinct character types
```

Unlike C++, Carbon will separate the integer and the character types. Carbon
character types add the information that the represented integer is a code unit
of some particular encoding. Without knowing the encoding, it is ambiguous how

> to interpret an integer value.

Reviewer: Should include the rationale from https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/1028052594070929499/1028113427371130971
which is better than the rationale I gave you.

### No Distinct Character Literal

In principle, a character literal can be represented by reusing string literals
similar to how Python handles character literals, however this would prevent
performing operations on characters as integers. For example, the `+` operator
on strings is used for concatenation, but `+` on a character would change its
value.

```
    var a: Char8 = 'a';
    var b: Char8 = 'b';

    if (a < b) {
        a += 1;

>     }

Reviewer: I think this example is more likely to reflect a use case developers will understand the need for:

```suggestion
// `digit` must be in the range 0..9.
fn DigitToChar(digit: i32) -> Char8 {
  return '0' + digit;
}
```

value.

```
// `digit` must be in the range 0..9.
fn DigitToChar(digit: i32) -> Char8 {
  return '0' + digit;
}
```

Furthermore, many properties of Unicode characters are defined on ranges of code
points, motivating supporting comparison operators on code points.

```
  var acute1: Char32 = "\u{E9}";
  var acute2: Char32 = "\u{301}\u{65}";

>   var matching: auto = if acute1 == acute2 then true else false; //output true

Reviewer: This example is not related to "ranges of code points"

```suggestion
fn IsDingBatCodePoint(c: Char32) -> bool {
  return c >= '\u{2700}' and c <= '\u{27BF}';
}
```

points, motivating supporting comparison operators on code points.

```
fn IsDingBatCodePoint(c: Char32) -> bool {
  return c >= '\u{2700}' and c <= '\u{27BF}';
}
```

> ### Supporting Prefix Declarations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Supporting prefix declarations
```

would detract the readability of the character literals and increase the
complexity of character literal [Types](#types).

> ### Allowing Numeric Escape Sequences

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Allowing numeric escape sequences
```

We will not be support escaping numeric sequences. This simplifies some of the
design choices by making types, the restrictions and behavior of character
literals simpler. Specifically [Types](#types) of `EBCDIC` by disallowing the
`\x...` pattern. However this does affect the readability, type-safety and
consistency of character literals. Since we are disallowing numeric escape
sequences for character literals, that diverges from the `String` type which
does allow for numeric escape sequences so we would essentially have the

> functionality to declare character literals but within a string literal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal does not support numeric escape sequences using `\x`. This
simplifies the design of character types and literals, making them only
represent code points and not code units. However this does come with the
disadvantage of less consistency of character literals with string literals, since
they now accept different escape sequences. We don't want to remove numeric
escape sequence from string literals, so we can support string use cases like
representing invalid encodings.
```

> Additiaonlly, there are other draw backs to discuss in that arena. In terms of
> type-safety and readability, if we take a look at `var first_digit: char = 0;`
> it's hard to see the intention, is this supposed to be a `NUL` character or is
> it supposed to be the character zero `'0'`? Whereas supporting numeric escape
> sequences, we can write `var first_digit: char = '0'` or
> `var first_digit: char = 'x\0'` where the intention is clear and defined.
> 
> Further, using integer literals instead of code unit escape sequences a user
> would assume we support initializing character types from integer literals
> `first_digit: char = 0;`, leading to assumptions surrounding how we'll permit
> implicit conversion from non-constant integer-valued expressions to character
> types. This diminishes our ability to distinguish between numbers and characters
> in our type system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach has the additional concern that if character literals don't support
numeric escape sequences, developers may choose to use numeric literals instead,
at a cost of type-safety and readability. For example, it isn't clear in
`var first_digit: Char8 = 0;` whether `0` is supposed to be a `NUL` character or the
encoding of the `'0'` character (48). We addressed this concern, and type safety
concerns about distinguishing numbers and characters, by making the integer to
character conversions explicit.
```

> ### Supporting Formulations of grapheme clusters and non-code-point code-units.

Reviewer: Capitalization is inconsistent. Please use sentence case, but with no period at the end.
```suggestion
### Supporting formulations of grapheme clusters and non-code-point code-units
```

> Rather than explicitly limiting characters literals to a more integer like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather than explicitly limiting characters literals to a more integer-like
```

> representation of single Unicode units, we could repsent characters literal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
representation of a single Unicode code point, we could represent characters literal
```

> formulations of grapheme clusters and non-code point code units. What humans

Reviewer: ```suggestion
formulations of grapheme clusters and non-code-point code units. What humans
```

tend to think of as a "character" is more a "grapheme cluster" that is an
arbitrarily long and complex encoding, which generally makes a more Unicode and
text friendly model while sacrificing the accesability of an integer like

> representation. If we wanted to add support for these other character

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tend to think of as a "character" corresponds to a "grapheme cluster." The encoding of
a grapheme cluster can be arbitrarily long and complex, which would sacrifice the
ability to perform integer operations. If we wanted to add support for other character
```

> formulations we need to use separate spellings to represent a small set of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
formulations, we would need to use separate spellings to represent a small set of
```

operations that are today expressed with integer-based math on C++'s character

> literals, for example things like converting an integer between 0 and 9 into the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
literals. This includes things like converting an integer between 0 and 9 into the
```

corresponding digit character, or computing the difference between two

> digits/two other characters. We would also need to provide a way to extract an
> actual integer from a codepoint in such a literal to handle esoteric needs, an
> additional type with some augmented API to handle the few common cases where C++
> uses arithmetic. For these reasons we have decided to start out by representing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
digits/two other characters. For these reasons, we have decided to start out by
representing
```

character literals as single Unicode code points following a more integer-like

> model. However this topic should be revisited, if we find that there is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
model. However this topic should be revisited if we find that there is a
```
